There's a trap in AI marketing right now
that's making brands invisible and most
marketers are walking straight into it.
My team and I study thousands of
campaigns across the brands we work with
and the ones we compete against. The
ones using AI the most had the lowest
brand recall. The ones using it the
least were falling behind on volume. But
a small group figured out a third way
and they're outperforming everyone.
Here's exactly what they're doing
differently.
Chapter 1, AI is making marketing
average.
Most marketers think AI will make their
creativity better and in many ways it
already has. Today one person can
generate ad visuals, write scripts,
produce voiceovers and even create
animations that rival Pixar's. These
were once things that would require
entire creative teams and even millions
and millions of dollars. But there's a
side effect no one talks about. Instead
of making brands more distinctive, AI is
actually pushing everyone towards the
same middle of the road ideas. And
here's the thing nobody in marketing
wants to say out loud. AI doesn't create
originality. It creates the statistical
average of the internet. Ben Affleck
explained this well in a recent
conversation with Joe Rogan.
>> For example, you try to get chat GPT or
Claude or Gemini to write you something,
it's really by its nature it goes to the
mean, to the average. He said generative
AI tends to produce the average version
of things because it's trained on
massive data sets that predicts the most
likely next output. That's exactly what
we're seeing in marketing right now.
Don't believe me? Let me show you. Open
LinkedIn right now and scroll. You'll
see the same hooks, the same structures,
the same 10 tips posts, different
brands, but the content feels almost
identical. And the data proves it. A
study from originality.ai found that
over 54% of long-form LinkedIn posts are
now AI generated. 189% increase since
chat GPT launched. And here's the part
that matters. Those AI posts get 45%
less engagement than original ones. Your
audience can't always explain why
something feels off, but they scroll
past it anyways. Right now, the default
workflow for most marketers looks like
this. Open chat GPT, type give me 10 ad
headlines, maybe write a blog post about
this topic and publish whatever comes
out. The problem, thousands of other
marketers are asking the same tools the
same questions. So, you end up with
different companies publishing slightly
different versions of the same content.
If your AI workflow starts with generate
content, you're already limiting your
creativity. But this isn't about your
content sounding generic. There's a
deeper problem and it's costing brands
something they can't easily get back.
Chapter 2, your brand is a feeling not a
logo.
One of the biggest mistakes marketers
make is thinking a brand is just a
visual identity, a logo, a color
palette, maybe a tone of voice guide.
But that's not what a brand is. A brand
isn't what your marketing looks like.
It's what people feel when they see it.
I was talking about this recently with
Matt, our global SVP of creative and
creative technologies and [music] he
said something that stuck with me. A
brand doesn't live inside a design
system or a brand book. [music] It lives
in the reaction people have when they
encounter your company. Think about
Levi's. When you see Levi's, there's a
feeling. Classic American cool, durable,
timeless. Now think about Dove. For
years they've reinforced one core idea,
real beauty. Those brands don't just
produce content. They produce
recognizable emotional signal. And when
companies rely too heavily on AI
generated marketing, that signal
disappears. Everything starts sounding
polished, but strangely interchangeable.
Want to see what that looks like in
practice? Look at Coca-Cola. They took
one of the most beloved Christmas ads of
all time and remade it with AI twice.
>> [music]
>> Both times the internet called it
soulless. One analyst scored the AI
version just 22 out of 100 compared to
the YouTube ads. A marketing professor
at University of Wisconsin-Madison said
the backlash hit so hard because
Christmas represents a connection and
community, values that felt
fundamentally at odds with AI generated
content. The brand that reinvented
emotional advertising couldn't replicate
the feeling with AI. That's not a
technology problem. That's a taste
problem. Your customers may not
consciously say "This feels AI
generated." But they can feel when a
brand has no real point of view. And
when every brand starts sounding the
same, the ones with a clear identity are
the ones people remember. So if AI is
making content average and it's
stripping out the emotion out of brands,
what are the companies that figured this
out are actually doing? That's where
this gets interesting. Chapter 3, use AI
to expand ideas not replace them.
The real power of AI isn't generating
finished output. It's expanding the
number of ideas you can explore. Most
marketers are using AI like a shortcut
to the final answer. But the smartest
teams, [music] they're using it earlier
in the process when ideas are still in
brainstorming phases. In traditional
advertising agencies, creative teams
didn't jump straight into writing the
ad. They started by tossing around
ideas, half-formed concepts, odd
connections, cultural references.
Sometimes someone from another team
would walk past a brainstorm and suggest
something unexpected. A small
observation that completely shifted the
direction of the campaign. Those moments
weren't planned. They were often where
the strongest ideas came from. Today, AI
can play that role in the early [music]
stage. Instead of asking AI to write the
final ad, use it to explore different
angles, new concepts, cultural
references, different ways to frame the
idea. That creates creative divergence
instead of convergence. Matt described
how he does this with our clients at NP
Digital. Instead of asking AI to write
headlines, he starts with a loose
territory around the brand. Themes like
journeys, experiences, the emotional
state the brand wants customers to feel.
From there, he pushes the conversation
wider asking for related concepts,
metaphors, adjacent ideas. During one of
those explorations, the word flow
surfaced. That single word ended up
becoming the seed for the entire
direction of the campaign. That's the
difference between using AI for answers
and using AI for exploration. The best
marketers don't treat AI as a writer.
They use it as an idea accelerator. The
tool that helps them see more
possibilities before choosing the
strongest one. But companies that are
really pulling ahead, they're not just
changing how they brainstorm. They're
building something bigger. Chapter 4,
build a creative system not a prompt.
The biggest misconception about AI in
marketing is that it is just a tool. You
open chat GPT, generate content, move
on. But the companies getting the most
value aren't treating it like a single
tool. They're building systems around
it. Think of it as a brand AI stack.
Instead of relying on one generic model,
these companies build multiple AI tools
trained for specific roles inside the
brand. One system analyzes contextual
trends and surfaces ideas the brand
could react to. Another evaluates
whether a campaign idea actually fits
the brand's voice. Another explores
creative directions before the team
commits to one. In that setup, AI isn't
replacing the creative team. It's acting
like an ecosystem of assistants helping
the team think faster. Instead of
generating one idea and hoping it works,
teams can explore dozens of directions,
test them quickly and refine the
strongest ones. The marketers who win
with AI won't be the ones writing the
best prompts. They'll be the ones who
design systems that help their teams
discover better ideas faster. But even
the best systems need one thing AI still
can't do. And this is where the real
competitive advantage lives.
Chapter 5, the real competitive
advantage is human taste.
>> [music]
>> As AI keeps improving, the one thing in
marketing that's becoming cheaper every
year is execution. AI can write copy,
generate visuals, produce ad variations
faster than most teams, which means the
competitive advantage is shifting
somewhere else and the data tells us
exactly where. Research shows that human
generated content receives over five
times more traffic than AI generated
content with steady growth while AI
content traffic fluctuates. But here's
the part most people miss. The highest
performing companies aren't avoiding AI.
They're the ones who have figured out
where AI should help and where humans
should lead. That's the third way. AI
can surface thousands of possible ideas,
but someone still has to recognize the
one that's worth building entire
campaign around. In the AI era, the
skill that matters the most isn't
prompting. It's taste. And if you need
help with taste, check out my ad agency
NP Digital where we were just named
performance marketing agency of the year
by Ad Age. The ability to look at a wall
of AI generated options and say, "That
one. That's the one." That's what can't
be automated. The future of marketing
won't be AI versus humans. It'll be
creative teams using AI to explore more
ideas, test more directions and move
faster. While the final decisions will
still come from people who understand
culture, customers and the brand they're
building. Brands that combine both will
move faster than everyone else without
becoming average. So here's what I want
you to do. Take your last 10 pieces of
content, strip the brand name off, show
them to someone on your team and ask,
"Can you tell this is us?" If they
can't, you're already in the trap. Drop
a comment and tell me what you found.
And if you want to go deeper on which
[music] AI tools actually work for
marketing and how to build this into
your workflow, watch this next video.